# Working Group Life Cycle


|[Brand Guidelines](brand-guidelines.md)|[Style Guide](style-guide.md)|*Working Group Lifecycle*|[Work Item Lifecycle](work-item-lifecycle.md)|[Github Donation](github-donation.md)|[Spec Tooling Guides](spec-tooling-guides.md)|[Code of Conduct](code-of-conduct.md)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
 
The DIF Working Group process is set up as follows: 
 
DIF's [Charter](https://bit.ly/DIFProjectCharter_4_0_3) and various [Addenda](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/org/tree/master/Org%20documents/Membership%20agreements) added over time by the Steering Committee include the authoritative text on all the processes and the IPR regime of the foundation. 

1.**Read the charter template**. Under DIF, each a Working Group is governed by
a (legal) charter, based on a Joint Development Foundation template and reviewed
by the JDF before going into force, that registers the Working Group with the
DIF's Steering Committee. Signing the same document is also used to register the
participation of DIF member organizations in the Working Group; member
organizations can join at or any time after chartering by signing it. 

The JDF WG Charter
[template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aT-05-yheMpaj3oEhFgI2Cl6n1lU50fn5tytanY5T7s/edit?usp=sharing)
is a very efficient template document by design. DIF has the flexibility to
modify only the name and scope of the Working Group in this document.
Additionally, DIF introduced an Operating Charter
[template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aLjawYuju-uIz5Lfu0OdpATky6q6Gc44uF-NLitYYu0/edit?usp=sharing),
which gives a working group freedom to add additional content or restrictions,
including any processes or policies that are not part of the base charter but
which can be vital for the Working Group's healthy and succesful cooperation.
The Operating Charter is accepted by the WG and ratified by DIF's Steering
Committee to create a higher barrier for modification. 
 
2.**Writing the WG charter**. Prior to setting up the WG charter, DIF members
and interested parties (which may need to join DIF or a co-sponsoring liasion
organization before signing) are advised to host non-IPR protected meetings to
finalize the WG Charter. While it can be challenging to do so in a
non-IPR-protected context, it is essential that the group define a scope for the
group and itemize both the "in-scope" and "out-of-scope" sections of the charter
first. To avoid duplication of effort, it is advised to approach existing WG's
to confirm there is no overlap or conflict between the scopes of bith charters.
One useful input to these meetings could be a review (by one or more parties who
report out to the rest of the group) the
[charters](https://github.com/decentralized-identity/org/tree/master/Org%20documents/WG%20documents)
of DIF's existing WG, particularly the more adjacent ones.

3.**Chair Selection**. Secondly, the initial participants should "elect" at
least two WG Chairs willing to commit to the work for at least the first year,
including initial maintenance if the working group's primary work item will be
finished within a year. These chairs should be from separate organizations with
no explicit or implicit affiliation (subject to approval by the Steering
Committee). If elections or processes other than election by the current chairs
and "soft-consensus" approval by the group are required for electing new chairs
later on, these processes should be described in the group's initial Operating
addendum. Such addenda can be added later, but chairship (and editorship or
other roles) can be a consequential decision and it is recommended such
decisions be made in advance.    

4.**Approval by Steering Committee**. Upon consensus agreement by the founding
participants on charter language and initial chairs, the WG Charter can be sent
to DIF's steering committe for ratification. DIF's steering committee may call
on the Technical Steering Committee and/or JDF counsel to clarify the value and
IP risks of the proposed working group scope, in particular its relation to
prior art to which WG participants or chairs hold IP rights. If such risks are
identified, the Steering Committee MAY request additional legal documentation
and/or donation of such prior art to DIF stewardship before ratification.

At this point, the WG is legally established. The WG charter then becomes part
of DIF's legal documents managed by LF, through their DocuSign processes. Once
at least 2 members of DIF join the Working Group the WG can be considered set
up, from a legal perspective.   

5.**Ongoing membership growth**. For participants to join a DIF Working Group,
participants either have to be an employee of a DIF member organization, or, if
they act on their own behalf, they shall have a signed Feedback Agreement (see
below, section 7) with DIF. Ongoing signatories to the already-approved WG
charter are managed by LF and co-signed by the ED of DIF. 

6.**Updates to the IPR regime under DIF** (and in general) are effective
retroactively. However, for the purpose of proper management, it is better to
worry in advance and not proceed with any signatures missing. WG Chairs are
strongly advised to make sure all meeting attendees have signed a legal
agreement with DIF when participating in a call. 

In case of a possible discrepancy, substantial contribution from non-member, or
lapse in coverage due to changing employment status, Chairs should request any
new or ongoing participant sign a legal document making explicit that IPR is
being honored. In the case that the participant refuses to do so, the WG chair
should consider removing the person from the call to minimize risk to attempt to
challenge the IPR coverage of the group, sometimes referred to casually as
"trolling". 

7.**Feedback Agreement**: Participants in a WG currently employed by DIF member
org that are covered by the Feedback Agreement rather then by the IPR terms of
their employment act on their own behalf, not on behalf of any employer. (Note:
this is modeled on the CLA of the W3C). If someone wants to represent their
company in a working group, that company must both be a member of DIF and a
signatory to the WG's charter. (Note: these terms also mirror those of W3C
working groups.) 

8.**Day-to-day IPR Enforcement**. The best way to manage IPR day in and day out
is to think of each participant is potentially a "patent troll," whether by
design or unwittingly. In practice, people may be participating in a working
group in good faith but still unwittingly bring into the discussion experiences
or ideas that are "property" of their current employer, and operating on partial
or out-of-date knowledge of that company's patent holdings and IPR strategy. It
it recommended that no exceptions or special treatment be extended to any
non-member guests during WG meetings, on WG mailing lists or Slack channels, or
over personal email/private message, regardless of intention to sign the charter
at a future time.
